---
type: article
author: You Nakai
place: Cpo
publish: 2014
tags:
  - tudor
  - hombre-maquina
bib: forreading
---
> [!info] leer sobre todo la parte de la obra de tudor como sistema vivo (incluyendo a la máquina) número 4

> [!PDF|yellow] [[Younakai_hearAfter.pdf#page=8&selection=57,21,189,86&color=yellow|Younakai_hearAfter, p.8]]
> > For instance, in Hornpipe (1967), a cybersonic console attached to the hornist “listens (with microphone)” 15 and analyzes the resonances of the performance space from the sounds of the horn, creating an electronic analog of the same resonant characteristics. This “map of [the space’s] resonant spectrum”16 is later sent out from the loudspeakers once a certain threshold has been attained within the circuitry. Mumma described this process as a three-fold interplay between the human performer, the cybersonic console, and the ‘personality’ of the auditorium. But both Tudor and Mumma went beyond the naïve premises of cybernetics. For at the core of their systems were factors of noise and indeterminacy that distorted any intention for regulated control of its operation. Sound was generated and modulated via the very failure of cybernetic control. The human composer-performer was accordingly seen not as a privileged observer who oversees the entirety of the composition but as a local component within the system; and machines, contrary to the cybernetic perspective, were no longer regarded as mere ‘servo-mechanisms.’ “If we admit of [sic] musical performance as social intercourse,” Mumma wrote in his ‘Notes on Cybersonics’ in 1970, “then we may include the varieties of artificial intelligence in our musical ensembles: not merely for their sophistication and speed, but also for the contribution of their personalities. We may treat the artificial intelligence not as a


> [!PDF|yellow] [[Younakai_hearAfter.pdf#page=9&selection=0,0,82,0&color=yellow|Younakai_hearAfter, p.9]]
> > slave, but as a collaborative equal in a democratic musical society.”17 This egalitarian view on machines and humans inside a musical system resembles not cybernetics, but ‘cybernetics of cybernetics’ that Heinz von Foerster and others were articulating circa 1970. 18 Contemplating on the role of the observer who inevitably enters and affects the operation of the system itself, von Foerster formulated the cybernetics of ‘observing systems’ as opposed to that of ‘observed systems.’ But the attribution of ‘personalities’ to electronic components (as well as the concert space), adds a further twist to this second-order cybernetics, by distributing the capacity for distinct observation (and listening) to all the components of the system. Not only the observer is included within the system, but his position is no longer stable nor singular since the other components return their gaze to him. 4 The difference between the observations of the observer and the system itself was theorized by one idiosyncratic theory of living systems that was developed in close relation to second-order cybernetics by Chilean neurophysicist and biologist Humberto Maturana and his former student Francisco Varela in the early 1970s: Autopoiesis. A simple observation formed the basis of their approach to living systems: there is always a gap between what an observer says about a system and the constitutive organization of the system itself. When this difference is thoroughly pursued, many characteristics endowed to living systems in previous theories are revealed to exist only inside the perspective of the observer and his domain of description. From here, Maturana and Varela made a radical move to dispense altogether with the perspective of an exterior observer. The list of things they excluded from the organization of living systems runs long: teleology, function, development, time, and even the notion of input and output of systems. When seen from its own standpoint, the operation of a living system is a closed network of processes of production (transformation) of components that produces the components that continuously regenerate the network of process that produced them—once activated, it might be added. Maturana and Varela stick to the forefront edge of the production process, describing happenstances only as they emerge and letting them go without retaining them in time: “the organism always behaves in the present.”


Por ejemplo, en Hornpipe (1967), una consola cibersónica conectada al trompetista “escucha (con micrófono)” 15 y analiza las resonancias del espacio de interpretación a partir de los sonidos del trompetista, creando un análogo electrónico de las mismas características resonantes. Este “mapa del espectro resonante [del espacio]” 16 se envía más tarde desde los altavoces una vez que se ha alcanzado un cierto umbral dentro del circuito. Mumma describió este proceso como una interacción triple entre el intérprete humano, la consola cibersónica y la “personalidad” del auditorio. Pero tanto Tudor como Mumma fueron más allá de las premisas ingenuas de la cibernética. Porque en el núcleo de sus sistemas había factores de ruido e indeterminación que distorsionaban cualquier intención de control regulado de su funcionamiento. **El sonido se generaba y modulaba a través del propio fallo del control cibernético. En consecuencia, el compositor-intérprete humano no era visto como un observador privilegiado que supervisa la totalidad de la composición, sino como un componente local dentro del sistema; y las máquinas, contrariamente a la perspectiva cibernética, ya no eran consideradas como meros "servomecanismos". "Si admitimos la interpretación musical como una interacción social", escribió Mumma en sus "Notas sobre cibersónica" en 1970, "entonces podemos incluir las variedades de inteligencia artificial en nuestros conjuntos musicales: no solo por su sofisticación y velocidad, sino también por la contribución de sus personalidades. Podemos tratar a la inteligencia artificial no como un esclavo, sino como un igual colaborador en una sociedad musical democrática”**. 17 Esta visión igualitaria de las máquinas y los humanos dentro de un sistema musical no se parece a la cibernética, sino a la “cibernética de la cibernética” que Heinz von Foerster y otros articulaban alrededor de 1970. 18 Al contemplar el papel del observador que inevitablemente entra y afecta el funcionamiento del sistema mismo, von Foerster formuló la cibernética de los “sistemas observadores” en oposición a la de los “sistemas observados”. Pero la atribución de “personalidades” a los componentes electrónicos (así como al espacio del concierto), añade un giro adicional a esta cibernética de segundo orden, al distribuir la capacidad de observación (y escucha) diferenciada entre todos los componentes del sistema. No sólo el observador está incluido dentro del sistema, sino que su posición ya no es estable ni singular, ya que los otros componentes le devuelven la mirada.
La diferencia entre las observaciones del observador y el sistema en sí fue teorizada por una teoría idiosincrásica de los sistemas vivos que fue desarrollada en estrecha relación con la cibernética de segundo orden por el neurofísico y biólogo chileno Humberto Maturana y su ex alumno Francisco Varela a principios de la década de 1970: la autopoiesis. Una simple observación formó la base de su enfoque de los sistemas vivos: siempre hay una brecha entre lo que un observador dice sobre un sistema y la organización constitutiva del sistema en sí. Cuando se investiga esta diferencia a fondo, se revela que muchas características otorgadas a los sistemas vivos en teorías anteriores existen solo dentro de la perspectiva del observador y su dominio de descripción. A partir de aquí, Maturana y Varela dieron un paso radical para prescindir por completo de la perspectiva de un observador exterior. La lista de cosas que excluyeron de la organización de los sistemas vivos es larga: teleología, función, desarrollo, tiempo e incluso la noción de entrada y salida de los sistemas. Visto desde su propio punto de vista, el funcionamiento de un sistema vivo es una red cerrada de procesos de producción (transformación) de componentes que produce los componentes que continuamente regeneran la red de procesos que los produjeron –una vez activados, se podría añadir. Maturana y Varela se aferran a la vanguardia del proceso de producción, describiendo las casualidades sólo a medida que surgen y dejándolas pasar sin retenerlas en el tiempo: “el organismo siempre se comporta en el presente”.

> [!PDF|important] [[Younakai_hearAfter.pdf#page=11&selection=21,0,47,81&color=important|Younakai_hearAfter, p.11]]
> > In 1976, Tudor wrote a short manifesto-like text entitled “The View from Inside,” for the program note of his concert with ‘Composers Inside Electronics’: Electronic components & circuitry, observed as individual & unique rather than as servomechanisms, more & more reveal their personalities, directly related to the particular musician involved with them. The deeper this process of observation, the more the components seem to require & suggest their own musical ideas, arriving at that point of discovery, always incredible, where music is revealed from ‘inside,’ rather than from ‘outside.’ 24 The words which describe electronic components as non-subservient and the gaze that sees their personalities, accord well to Mumma’s ‘Notes on Cybernetics.’ But
> > > [!PDF|important] [[Younakai_hearAfter.pdf#page=12&selection=0,0,69,47&color=important|Younakai_hearAfter, p.12]]
> > the topological trope here addresses the depth of observational process of circuitry, and not the immersion into sounds with a life of their own. This view from inside, in other words, is the view of the ‘composer’ who delves into his components to discover a new music through his observation, and gives a name to a particular musical idea to distinguish it from another. In this way, he produces a unity of ‘composition’ that cannot be reduced to the instantiations of its performed life. And as a composer he will indeed produce many of them throughout his life. The earlier description of the nature of Tudor’s composite instruments was generic. It was intended as such to form a correlative to the level of observation that saw the interminable life of sounds. But there is an ‘inside,’ located outside of the autopoietic process of production. And Tudor’s observation of ‘life’ oscillated between these two insides. “There’s always a certain point where the work that you do to realize these musical ideas, all of a sudden it has a life of its own, and that’s the point where I decide that it’s my musical composition. When it’s living for itself then I feel, ‘Okay, I can sign my name to that.’”25 In a peculiar manner, the composer obtained a work that belonged to him at the very moment it left his hands. Then, relieved of his duty, the composer would become a performer within his composition that now lives for itself: “when the process is really living, I can set to work and not really worry about it”26 But before this life is fully composed, the observer encounters components quite other than autopoietic sounds within Tudor’s ‘view from inside’: electronic objects.
> 
> En 1976, Tudor escribió un breve texto, parecido a un manifiesto, titulado “La vista desde adentro”, para la nota del programa de su concierto con “Composers Inside Electronics”: **Los componentes electrónicos y los circuitos, observados como individuos y únicos más que como servomecanismos, revelan cada vez más sus personalidades, directamente relacionadas con el músico particular involucrado con ellos.** Cuanto más profundo es este proceso de observación, más parecen requerir y sugerir los componentes sus propias ideas musicales, llegando a ese punto de descubrimiento, siempre increíble, **donde la música se revela desde “adentro”, más que desde “afuera”. 24 Las palabras que describen a los componentes electrónicos como no subordinados y la mirada que ve sus personalidades, concuerdan bien con las “Notas sobre cibernética” de Mumma**. Pero el tropo topológico aquí aborda la profundidad del proceso de observación de los circuitos, y no la inmersión en sonidos con vida propia. Esta visión desde dentro, en otras palabras, es la visión del “compositor” que se adentra en sus componentes para descubrir una nueva música a través de su observación, y da un nombre a una idea musical particular para distinguirla de otra. De esta manera, produce una unidad de “composición” que no puede reducirse a las instancias de su vida interpretada. Y como compositor, de hecho producirá muchas de ellas a lo largo de su vida. La descripción anterior de la naturaleza de los instrumentos compuestos de Tudor era genérica. Se pretendía que formara un correlato con el nivel de observación que veía la vida interminable de los sonidos. **Pero hay un “interior”, ubicado fuera del proceso autopoiético de producción. Y la observación de Tudor de la “vida” oscilaba entre estos dos interiores. “Siempre hay un cierto punto en el que el trabajo que haces para realizar estas ideas musicales, de repente tiene vida propia, y ese es el punto en el que decido que es mi composición musical.** Cuando vive para sí misma, entonces siento: “Está bien, puedo firmar con mi nombre”. 25 De una manera peculiar, el compositor obtuvo una obra que le pertenecía en el mismo momento en que salió de sus manos. Entonces, liberado de su deber, el compositor se convertiría en un intérprete dentro de su composición que ahora vive para sí misma: “cuando el proceso está realmente vivo, puedo ponerme a trabajar y no preocuparme realmente por ello”. 26 **Pero antes de que esta vida esté completamente compuesta, el observador encuentra componentes muy distintos de los sonidos autopoiéticos dentro de la “visión desde adentro” de Tudor: objetos electrónicos.**

> [!PDF|red] [[Younakai_hearAfter.pdf#page=24&selection=27,0,81,82&color=red|Younakai_hearAfter, p.24]]
> > The strange relationship between the observer and objects thus observed can be connected to recent theoretical endeavors of Graham Harman. The tenet of his socalled Object-Oriented Ontology (OOO) is that objects withdraw from all relations—with humans, as well as other objects. Harman sees this withdrawal as constituting the ‘inner life’ of objects that is secluded from all external access, and inexhaustible to external observation. All relations between objects and humans, and among objects themselves are thus never direct, and must always be formed through a ‘vicarious causation’—mediation by and within a third object. But relations never reach the internal life of an object, and only serve to distort its realities: “We distort when we see, and distort when we use. (…) It is not human consciousness that distorts the reality of things, but relationality per se.” 33 This ontological schema could perhaps be connected to Tudor’s music to explain the role of objects which serve as the infrastructure for the life of sounds that compose themselves. Sounds as well as signals emerge as distortions through the mismatched and indirect relations that components enter into. More accurately, sound/signal is distortion that is the relation, and thus constitutes the third object through which components can encounter. And as an object, it also withdraws from the perception of any other object-component. If this withdrawal of sounds from the components is seen as constituting a life of its own, then autopoiesis can happily take over the story from there. In fact, the philosophy of object orientation reads much like autopoiesis written in reverse. They first of all share the same premise: a strict closure on the side of objects (machines) with inner lives that in no way can be reduced to the description of the observer. From there, they pace in contrary directions. Whereas autopoiesis delves into the closure to depict its operations from within, OOO adheres to the position of the exterior observer. On one side there is only a view


> [!PDF|red] [[Younakai_hearAfter.pdf#page=25&selection=0,0,158,82&color=red|Younakai_hearAfter, p.25]]
> > from inside to account for living systems, and on the other, there is only a view from outside to contemplate objects with inner life. Accordingly, the continuity that is life is defined in extreme positivity (tautology of the view from inside) in autopoiesis, which OOO flips around to a dedicated negativity (irreducibility to the view from outside). Once the basic frame of description is thus set, application follows suit—the condition of interiority and exteriority is generalized. Thus, OOO distributes the status of external observation to all objects, whereas autopoiesis reflects on the act of cognition as a production process that produces its own components. True, the biologists proceed with more caution, since they had started their inquiry by the paradoxical move of abandoning the status of the observer. For the philosopher who never really left his ground, the observer becomes an unexamined premise in the composition of his narrative. Consequently, the sensitivity to the gaze of observation and language of description in autopoeisis becomes coated by an utmost indifference in Harman’s philosophy. This withdrawal of the observer leads to an explosion of what the philosopher can account for. Harman’s objective is an inquiry into “an ontological feature of objects in general,” 34 which is to say, “the basic structural features shared by all objects” 35 [emphasis added]. But the generic totality here is more a matter of definition than observation. Admitting that ‘marbles’ “may not be ‘marbles’ for anyone but humans or playful kittens,” Harman nonetheless provides a peculiar excuse to his generalization: “we need a nickname for the united object that we draw into our games.”36 But if they are not ‘marbles’ for anyone but humans or kittens, why the presumption that they are “unified objects” at all? The simple answer is because the philosopher defines ‘objects’ as such. Claiming that all objects in general conceal an inner life that cannot be accessed from the outside, does not release them from their correlation with humans—it merely turns the relationship into one that is defined negatively. The general and negative realism of objects is thus consumed under the transparent and determinate authority of the observer and his language of speculation. The secret withdrawal of the observer in Harman’s account is staged explicitly in Maturana and Varela’s writing. But as they leave behind the domain of description, they leave it intact. The line between the exteriority of the observer and the interior of the observed system is maintained as forever determinate, providing a space in which the philosopher may later dwell. The view from inside and the view from outside are thus not only contrary, but also complementary. But the position of the observer is neither here nor there. It is not as stable as
> > > [!PDF|red] [[Younakai_hearAfter.pdf#page=24&selection=85,0,89,33&color=red|Younakai_hearAfter, p.24]]
> > Graham Harman, ”Vicarious Causation,” Collapse II (London: Urbanomic, 2007): 193
> 
> 
> 
> 
