---
type: 
tags:
  - tudor
  - instruments
  - kagel
place: American Music University of Illinois
author: Jonathan Goldman
publish: 2012
bib: sec
---
> [! important] Tiene mucha data del bandonéon en sí. Importante, la ESTEREOFONIA. Además de relatar vida de Tudor y relación con otros compositores


> [! info] leido completo


> [!PDF|yellow] [[GoldmanJonathan_The_Buttons_on_Pandora_s_Box_David_Tudor.pdf#page=3&selection=0,0,10,16&color=yellow|GoldmanJonathan_The_Buttons_on_Pandora_s_Box_David_Tudor, p.3]]
> > Mauricio Kagel (1931–2008), who had dedicated his 1960 composition Pandorasbox, bandoneonpiece to Tudor. Six years later, and despite more than a few technical difficulties, as was not uncommon over the course of nine evenings, the “happening”-style work, entitled Bandoneon! (a combine), was performed.
> 
> 

SOBRE LO ESTEREO
> [!PDF|important] [[GoldmanJonathan_The_Buttons_on_Pandora_s_Box_David_Tudor.pdf#page=10&selection=19,0,26,24&color=important|GoldmanJonathan_The_Buttons_on_Pandora_s_Box_David_Tudor, p.10]]
> > by 1957, the promise of in-home stereo technology had become widely anticipated by musicians and serious listeners alike and was viewed as a model audio technique that had . . . a significant relationship with musical recording and reproduction. In an avant-garde context, mentioning the term “stereophonic” places these artists in an interesting, perhaps unexpected . . . relationship to another context of fashionable consumer technologies, industrial demands, and popular listening practices of the period.

> [!PDF|red] [[GoldmanJonathan_The_Buttons_on_Pandora_s_Box_David_Tudor.pdf#page=16&selection=10,0,63,45&color=red|GoldmanJonathan_The_Buttons_on_Pandora_s_Box_David_Tudor, p.16]]
> > Significantly, the concert was staged by the dancer and choreographer Elizabeth Harris, who decided to have Tudor and Oliveros perform the piece while seated on either side of a rotating seesaw mounted on a lazy Susan, clearly emphasizing the stereophonic properties of both instruments. This arrangement gave rise to the so-called seesaw version of the work. It is unclear whether Harris’s staging was itself inspired by Kagel’s rotating stool in Pandorasbox, which Tudor would likely have discussed with her in the weeks leading up to the performance. Alternatively, it is possible that Harris would have seen a performance of Pandorasbox performed by Kagel himself, since Kagel had been invited to Mills College in Oakland, California, in 1963.40 In either case, the staging can be considered an extension of Kagel’s stereophonic experiments. Describing the duo in a program note from the time of its first performance, Oliveros emphasized the fact that the seesaw setup accentuated the “native” stereophony of the instrument: A few days later, Elizabeth [Harris] had constructed a handsome seesaw which not only went up and down, revolved around the center and had revolving seats, but it was absolutely silent. [Oliveros’s pet mynah bird] Ahmed’s cage was suspended over the center as part of a mobile made from wooden dowels and large, odd-shaped lead fishing weights. David and I clambered onto this glorious instrument, which was not only dramatic, but would surely create stereophony with the sound sources in motion.41 The stereophony of the instrument is in the Duo transposed to a higher level of structure—another instance of mirroring that might be likened to the rhetorical figure of synecdoche—since two stereophonic (“bi-instrumental”) instruments are themselves separated in space.42 Not only does the rotating seesaw create a three-dimensional spatialization that goes beyond even what is attainable through stereophony, but according to Oliveros the rotation was fast enough to provoke a Doppler effect, the downward glissandi familiar from the sound of sirens on a moving ambulance.43 More than two decades later, on October 16, 1986, this performance was reprised at the Victoria Theatre in San Francisco, with composer Gordon Mumma (b. 1935) performing the part composed for Tudor and his bandoneon (fig. 9).44 Oliveros later acknowledged that this experi-
> > [!PDF|red] [[GoldmanJonathan_The_Buttons_on_Pandora_s_Box_David_Tudor.pdf#page=17&selection=0,0,10,67&color=red|GoldmanJonathan_The_Buttons_on_Pandora_s_Box_David_Tudor, p.17]]
> > ment in spatialized sound has led her to incorporate similar effects in her music up to the present day. The seesaw staging sensitized Oliveros to the spatial layout of both the accordion and the bandoneon and the way it could lead to different spatial arrangements in musical performances. In a 2008 performance with the free-jazz pianist Cecil Taylor, Oliveros asked to be seated on a swiveling secretarial chair, and during the concert she spun around, much like Kagel in Pandorasbox, creating a simple but effective panning effect on her stereophonic instrument.
> 
> Cabe destacar que la puesta en escena del concierto estuvo a cargo de la bailarina y coreógrafa Elizabeth Harris, quien decidió que Tudor y Oliveros interpretaran la pieza sentados a cada lado de un balancín giratorio montado sobre una mesa giratoria, enfatizando claramente las propiedades estereofónicas de ambos instrumentos. Este arreglo dio lugar a la llamada versión balancín de la obra. No está claro si la puesta en escena de Harris se inspiró en el taburete giratorio de Kagel en Pandorasbox, que Tudor probablemente habría discutido con ella en las semanas previas a la presentación. Alternativamente, es posible que Harris hubiera visto una representación de Pandorasbox interpretada por el propio Kagel, ya que Kagel había sido invitado al Mills College en Oakland, California, en 1963.40 En cualquier caso, la puesta en escena puede considerarse una extensión de los experimentos estereofónicos de Kagel. Al describir al dúo en una nota del programa de la época de su primera actuación, Oliveros enfatizó el hecho de que la configuración del balancín acentuaba la estereofonía "nativa" del instrumento: Unos días después, Elizabeth Harris había construido un hermoso balancín que no solo subía y bajaba, giraba alrededor del centro y tenía asientos giratorios, sino que era absolutamente silencioso. La jaula de Ahmed el pájaro miná mascota de Oliveros estaba suspendida sobre el centro como parte de un móvil hecho de clavijas de madera y grandes pesas de plomo para pescar de formas extrañas. David y yo nos subimos a este glorioso instrumento, que no sólo era dramático, sino que seguramente crearía estereofonía con las fuentes de sonido en movimiento.41 **La estereofonía del instrumento está en el Dúo transpuesta a un nivel superior de estructura —otro ejemplo de reflejo que podría compararse con la figura retórica de la sinécdoque— ya que dos instrumentos estereofónicos ("bi-instrumentales") están separados en el espacio.==42== El balancín giratorio no sólo crea una espacialización tridimensional que va más allá incluso de lo que se puede lograr a través de la estereofonía, sino que según Oliveros la rotación era lo suficientemente rápida como para provocar un efecto Doppler, los glissandi descendentes familiares del sonido de las sirenas en una ambulancia en movimiento.** 43 Más de dos décadas después, el 16 de octubre de 1986, esta interpretación se repitió en el Teatro Victoria de San Francisco, con el compositor Gordon Mumma (nacido en 1935) interpretando la parte compuesta para Tudor y su bandoneón (fig. 9).44 Oliveros reconoció más tarde que Este experimento con el sonido espacializado la ha llevado a incorporar efectos similares en su música hasta el día de hoy. La puesta en escena en sube y baja la sensibilizó a Oliveros respecto de la disposición espacial tanto del acordeón como del bandoneón y la forma en que podía conducir a diferentes disposiciones espaciales en las interpretaciones musicales. En una actuación de 2008 con el pianista de free-jazz Cecil Taylor, Oliveros pidió que la sentaran en una silla de secretaria giratoria y durante el concierto giró, como Kagel en Pandorasbox, creando un efecto panorámico simple pero efectivo en su instrumento estereofónico.


> [!PDF|yellow] [[GoldmanJonathan_The_Buttons_on_Pandora_s_Box_David_Tudor.pdf#page=30&selection=91,0,97,84&color=yellow|GoldmanJonathan_The_Buttons_on_Pandora_s_Box_David_Tudor, p.30]]
> > 42. The spatial conception underpinning the seesaw contraption is also reminiscent of the spinning sounds that Stockhausen created for *Kontakte* through the use of four microphones that capture the sounds emitted from a speaker mounted on a rotating platform




> [!PDF|important] [[GoldmanJonathan_The_Buttons_on_Pandora_s_Box_David_Tudor.pdf#page=11&selection=0,0,24,53&color=important|GoldmanJonathan_The_Buttons_on_Pandora_s_Box_David_Tudor, p.11]]
> > Avant-garde composers frequently employ a musical strategy in which they extract a technology, such as stereophony, from its context (in this case the recording studio, where it was conceived as a component of “high fidelity”) and use it as a compositional parameter in and of itself—as a method of presentation rather than representation. A familiar feature of the evolution of sound technology in the twentieth century is that it undergoes category changes: a new technology crosses the aisle from a production tool to a presentation tool or vice versa, just as the loudspeaker, invented as a tool of representation of preexisting music, later came to be exploited by composers of musique concrète and electronic music as a component in the very production of musical works. Stereophony underwent a similar transformation in the history of avant-garde music.20 The properties of the bandoneon fit in with this composerly interest in stereo sound: the instrument is already spatialized along its horizontal axis and because the bellows are long enough (much longer than those of the accordion) to ensure that these two sides are sufficiently separated in space to be heard as distinct sound sources (and in some cases, captured by different microphones and sent off into different loudspeakers)
> 
> 


En 1960, el argentino Mauricio Kagel compuso **Pandorasbox** (Bandoneonpiece), una obra teatral en la que el intérprete habla, gesticula y gira sobre una plataforma giratoria. Su amigo, el pianista David Tudor, adquirió un bandoneón poco después y comenzó a tocar con él extensamente, tocando no sólo Pandorasbox sino también obras que le encargó, como **Mesa** (1966) de Gordon Mumma, utilizada más tarde por la Merce Cunningham Dance Company, en el que el sonido capturado desde seis micrófonos pasa a través de cuatro atenuadores controlados por voltaje. Siguieron otros encargos curiosos, incluido **A Piece for Bandoneon and Strings** (1966) de Stanley Lunetta, en el que las cuerdas en cuestión son cables eléctricos. Las exploraciones de Tudor culminaron en su propia obra magna bandoneum titulada **Bandoneon. (A Combine)**, una obra multimedia con electrónica en vivo y proyecciones visuales producida en las ahora famosas Nine Evenings organizadas por Experiments in Arts and Technology (E.A.T.) en 1966.


