## 1. Introduction to Artistic Research
### What is?
Let’s start with a basic question: what is Artistic Research? Research is often understood as the production of new knowledge – or perhaps better, the seeking after new knowledge. There are no guarantees. Our understanding of what knowledge is, of how and where we find it, has developed in interesting ways over recent decades. How has this come about? We might identify four strands in particular: Cognitive theory has proposed a broader understanding of the ways in which humans produce and use knowledge. We now speak of embodied knowledge, of distributed knowledge. In the practice of science, rapid advances have obliged us to confront the new kinds of knowledge it generates. The technologies of simulation, for example, produce vital knowledge that may not be falsifiable in conventional terms. And theoretical science can generate hypotheses that challenge human understanding itself. Philosophy has widely acknowledged that the very notion of knowledge is a human cultural phenomenon – we recognise that it exists within a discourse, within some kind of cultural context, while at the same time we seek to avoid the perpetual relativizing of knowledge. And our common understanding of what constitutes culture - what constitutes art and artistic practice - has broadened immeasurably. In music we see this in the way that musical institutions, disciplines and criticism have come to encompass improvisation, nonWestern musics, popular music, sound art, technological and conceptual developments alongside what was previously considered the domain of ‘art’ music. Whether knowledge exists in different kinds or whether we should rather consider that we acquire it in different modes is a matter of continuous debate. What is important for our purposes is that knowledge generated in one situation cannot simply be mapped onto another. The articulation and mediation of knowledge will become an important topic as we explore artistic research. Is it a new discipline? Well, as we listen to different views we will discover that there is no formula, no dogma. The conception of a project is itself a creative activity, a process of research. But the various paths to knowledge have in common a balance of coherent, rigorous thought, insight, an awareness of context and some kind of sustained practice – this is as true of the most personal of poetry as it is of the most objective of science. In the case of Artistic Research we’re dealing with the pursuit of knowledge by artists, through their art. There are several nearly-cognate terms, labels that mean nearly the same: for instance creative research, practice-based or practice-led research, or even practice-as-research. Why are these different? Well, as I said earlier, knowledge exists in the context of a discourse, an exchange: sufficient consensus for differences of opinion to make sense. We might think of these as knowledge economies. Economies have their own terms, values and dynamics, so it’s not surprising that the knowledge economy in one country – one system of funding and learning – has different ways of expressing and evaluating this kind of work to that in another, and makes different demands on artist researchers. Just like science, artistic research cannot entirely separate itself from the institutional context within which it takes place. Just as in science, there is often a dynamic tension between institution or discipline and the individual. But the negotiation of this tension is an essential part of the production of knowledge, of discourse and of community. A project of artistic research implicitly forms a critical relationship with its institutional situation just as it does with its intellectual and musical contexts. The practice of artistic research explores the boundaries of the ways in which the institutions of music conceive of their own discipline, their own role.

### Why now?
What are the common elements of artistic research as we’re discussing it here, then? We’re talking about projects where the artist drives the research, where their practice is not only central but indispensable to it – where the question arises from their practice and where only through their particular practice, their accumulated knowledge and experience and curiosity, can their particular question be addressed. ‘Question’ in this sense is a usefully plastic, malleable concept, as we shall see. It ranges from very specific problems to investigation, speculation, thought experiment or leap of the imagination. And the results of artistic research go beyond the normal fruits of the practice – beyond a performance or a composition, for example. The means of their sharing is itself part of the research process. Two questions often arise from this description. Firstly: how about the great creative innovators of musical language? How about Philippe de Vitry and the ars nova? Rameau’s theory of harmony? Schönberg? Stockhausen, Boulez or Nono? Duke Ellington or Miles Davis? Are they not artistic researchers? In certain respects, certainly. But I would suggest that here we are dealing with a more focussed understanding, one that is particular to our moment in cultural-intellectual history. And why now? Why has artistic research emerged as a topic and become so relevant to musicians over recent years? Because of the expansion of modes of knowledge we discussed earlier. Because of major changes to our cultural environment – its multiplicity, its wide, dispersed dissemination – but also the evolution of its related value systems. And because of the ways in which the professional and social roles of musicians have developed. More than ever, we all inhabit multiple musical worlds, combine multiple musical experiences – our musical activities have many aspects and engage with different audiences, different communities, different professional networks. Musicians have to reflect on where they fit in to this kaleidoscope, how they reconcile these elements, how they maintain some kind of centre as an artist, how they plot a line of development and why the world might be interested. We might almost describe artistic research as an ethos as much as a discipline. The second question concerns a crucial property of artistic research. Are all creative musicians not artist-researchers? Well, again a broad view might say yes, but here we’re talking about artistic research as a particular contemporary field of activity. One of its most important aspects is communication – sharing the knowledge it generates and situating that knowledge in a wider understanding of the current state of thought.
By sharing new understanding, important common issues can emerge. Artistic research is an activity that builds community among artists. It counterbalances the tendencies to the commodification of music on one hand and its fragmentation and individualisation on the other. This requires reflection beyond one’s own immediate issues. It requires situating one’s work in a wider context and engagement with broader discourses – in music, but also in other areas, as we shall see. And it requires careful consideration of how to contribute to those discourses. To summarise: in the artistic research we are discussing here, the questions, topics and projects arise from the practice of the particular artist researcher. They are explored and investigated through that practice, but the research is situated in intellectual, cultural and creative discourses with which it forms a critical relationship. Thinking about the ways in which this knowledge will be shared is itself part of the research process. The design of a research project is itself a creative process. There is no dogma or formula – on the contrary, it crucially involves forming a critical relationship with received ideas and contributing to wider discussion. What is my own background? Well, I’m a trumpet-player and composer. I have always made scores, performed contemporary music, worked with improvisers, with ideas from sound art, as well as in historically informed performance. Early on I wondered how these apparently diverse activities could be reconciled. Then I realised that this is the normal state for a contemporary musician: we all inhabit multiples spheres, move in multiple networks of activity and interest. But they all reflect the fundamental complex reality of musical life in our present. So I work with technology to explore the spaces between such areas: between score and improvisation, between composition and installation, between the acts of music and the autonomy of musical structures. And I look at how we adopt and adapt ideas from science – ideas that in our highly-technologised world seem to be in the air, part of our common discourse. Through the following units we will hear from some experienced artist-researchers, learn how their own practice and experience led them to be involved in artistic research, and how they understand it.

### Introduction
In the course of this first section we will hear from a range of artist-researchers – individual views of artistic research that, crucially, are always bound up with their own personal trajectory, their journey as musicians, thinkers, cultural actors and members of society. We will begin by hearing from a group of musicians who while pursuing very different paths all have a grounding in the same musical-cultural-technical practice – that of the piano soloist in the Western art music tradition. By encountering artists from the same root discipline we see more clearly what a vast range of approaches develops as these musicians identify as artist-researchers. Imagine how these possibilities expand as we consider the work of improvisers, composers, sound artists, musicians from other cultures, those working with music from distant history or with future technologies. As you encounter these artists and their approaches – how between them they push at the edges of their field, its practices and knowledge – think how your own experience and curiosity might lead you to explore the boundaries of your own topic, to ask new questions, develop new practice and create new concepts. The artists you will hear from in this first section represent a central, well-investigated and highly literate area of Western music. This is both a strength and a challenge – your own area will bring different opportunities – but it brings into focus the issue of connecting new ideas with established practices. As you will notice, the views even from this constrained group of artist-researchers are far from identical; each has constructed their own context for their work. But they have certain fundamentals in common. They formulate questions that emerge from their own artistic experience. They consider in depth the practices, thought and research of people working in their field, or on related topics. They look to other disciplines to find the tools for their research. Their work resonates with current areas of thought – the embodiment, materiality and distributedness of human experience, for example. They think coherently, identifying and pursuing the logical implications of their ideas. And they reflect, search and question constantly. Above all, they have in common an evolving sense of self as an artist. However wideranging, abstract or multi-disciplinary their work becomes, this core sense of self constitutes its ground or horizon. It is dynamic and questioning - never static and certainly never complete. Ideally it will evolve in a feedback relationship with your research – this, surely, is the prime motivation.
As an initial assignment, therefore, we would like you to begin by reflecting on your own identity, activity and context as a musician. Even if you consider yourself a fluent writer, we suggest that as a first step you make a short video – in this way the process of reflection is tangible, material, inescapable, as well as being good practice for presenting your work later. On your phone, record yourself explaining your practice. What do you do, in practical terms? Why? What field do you work in – your topic? What are the issues you confront in your practice as an artist? Here it’s important to think beyond technical or personal challenges. What musical, cultural or professional networks or practices do you move in or relate to? And what other areas of thought or practice are you interested in or have you encountered that might be relevant to your work as an artist? Then watch your video; listen as if you were someone else. Write a short summary of the presentation, and consider what topics, issues or questions emerge from what you hear.

### What does artistic research mean to individual researchers?
Hi, my name is Tom Beghin and I’m an artist-researcher at the Orpheus Institute. My line of work is historically informed performance—or HIP. There was a time when we were expected to defend ourselves: Of the “Intentional Fallacy”: but do we actually claim to be performing a piece of music as the composer intended it? Of the notion of “authenticity”: but should the singular “authenticity” not yield to a plural “authenticities”? Of “reconstructionism”: where do we draw the line? When playing an eighteenth-century violin or keyboard, do we also wear a wig or a corset? Unfazed by these objections (which themselves are just as ideologically-driven as any possible rebuttals of them), I dare say that historical awareness is the driving motor behind my artistic research. The questions I pursue address history not just in an “applied musicology” kind of way, but they are directed towards my own, artistic performance— whether alone or with others. Performance should here not be understood as some goal of my preliminary research: often it’s through the testing of hypotheses—suddenly seeing different priorities—that I redefine “performance” altogether—and here, of course, it helps to explain: to write, to show, to describe—but also, more scientifically, to test, to validate, to understand. Over the years, I’ve shifted my inquiries from the question of what it is that I perform (the score), to whom it is that I perform (and this, emphatically, does not restrict itself to the composer, but to the people he or she interacted with). The “who” not just creates a metonymic shift from “the results of creation” to “the creating mind,” but evokes specific rhetorical networks and socio-cultural contexts. The composer’s voice becomes one among many: it instigates, facilitates, or partakes in musicking-rhetorical communication—and so do “I” … with my historical counterparts. Where there’s communication, there’s people. And where there’s people there are also things, and technologies.
In this historical engraving, we see a keyboard-playing lady, flanked by two string-playing men. They play a Haydn Trio. Not just acoustically, she is at the center of the attention. Reconstructing this set-up—and finding use for it in our own performing—required a creative solution: we clipped two music stands on the edges of our opened Stein fortepiano. Once seated, we may begin to ask: what interaction—through body language, through sound and gesture—does Haydn’s score allow to occur? How do we historicize “successful performance” on the modern stage, bearing in mind that our historical counterparts were almost certainly not “professionals”? What forgotten virtues do we decide to foster again in our renewed understanding of Haydn’s rhetorical skills? In this particular Haydn trio, the first of a set of three, how do we make those delicate, perhaps awkward first moments of musical conversation the “subject” again of Haydn’s composition and our performance of it, not only at a first rehearsal but also re-enacted, in front of an audience? Impersonation is the keyword here. Impersonation also drove my recent project on Beethoven’s late piano music. My interest in Beethoven’s late piano music started with a reconstruction of his 1817 Broadwood piano. The question that this newly built, optimally functioning instrument provoked, was exciting enough: is it necessary to have an English-style piano when performing Beethoven’s late piano music? (After all, that’s the instrument that Beethoven had when composing his last sonatas: it’s historical reality, in other words.) But my excitement turned into frustration as I realized I could not yet answer this question— not without reconstructing a second piece of technology: the “hearing machine” or Gehörmaschine that had been customized to go on top of Beethoven’s Broadwood. The project became both interdisciplinary and collaborative, as my own perspective gradually morphed from that of a well-hearing pianist into that of a deafly creating pianistcomposer. Acoustics and disability studies started informing my interpretations of Beethoven’s Sonatas Opus 109, 110, and 111. “You do hear better, don’t you, when you bring your head under the machine,” the piano builder André Stein asked Beethoven, almost certainly in reference to the Gehörmaschine that Stein had build in 1820.
As I play the opening of Beethoven’s Sonata Opus 110, at that first moment of a time-out— that trill on a dominant-seventh chord—also I put my head into the machine, not so much to hear the sounds but to sense their vibrations as they reflect against all possible surfaces inside the hearing machine. To feel compelled to do so and to give that fermata new meaning are the results of an extended research process that started with a hunch and that led me—as the inquiring artist—to unsuspected places.

1. Frayling, Christopher. 1993. 'Research in Art and Design'. _Royal College of Art Research Papers_, vol. 1: 1, pp. 1-5. London: Royal College of Art.  
    [Download paper (.pdf)](https://courses.edx.org/assets/courseware/v1/b1beb7e721d39c0456fa598ff09d5e67/asset-v1:KULeuvenX+MUSRESx+3T2023+type@asset+block/1_required_reading_01_ocr.pdf)
2. Coessens, Kathleen, Darla Crispin and Anne Douglas. 2009. ‘Why artistic research matters’. In _The Artistic Turn_, ed. K. Coessens, D. Crispin and A. Douglas, pp. 165-181. Leuven: Leuven University Press.  
    [Download chapter (.pdf)](https://courses.edx.org/assets/courseware/v1/460dc7503a0324fdbe2f056e2783ef34/asset-v1:KULeuvenX+MUSRESx+3T2023+type@asset+block/1_required_reading_02.pdf)
3. Nagel, Jennifer. 2014. _Knowledge: A Very Short Introduction._ Oxford: Oxford University Press.
4. Impett, Jonathan. 2017. ‘The Contemporary Musician and the Production of Knowledge: Practice, Research, and Responsibility’. In _Artistic Research in Music: Discipline and Resistance_, ed. J. Impett, pp. 221-240. Leuven: Leuven University Press.

## 2. Finding focus: articulating questions, topics and objectives
    
## 3. Scoping and locating the project
    
## 4. Methodology
    
## 5. Negotiating with theory, creating a discourse
    
## 6. Documentation, dissemination and returning research to practice
    
## End of the course