---
type: obra
author: David Tudor
publish: 1968
place: 
tags:
  - obra
  - tudor
  - timeline
listen: y
---
<span  
class='ob-timelines'  
data-date='1968-02-01-00'  
data-title='Rainforest'  
data-img="https://encrypted-tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcRFkerf5fE10FLW270uET0MMeGYyN6cvYOTaQ&s"
data-type='range'  
data-end='1968-12-01-00'>  
</span>
(posterior a Bandoneón - significa 'selva tropical')
> [!PDF|yellow] [[Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor.pdf#page=46&selection=37,0,66,8&color=yellow|Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor, p.46]]
> > One of the ideas in my Rainforest series is that loudspeakers should be individuals, they should be instruments. So if you need a hundred of them to fill a hall, each one should have its own individual voice. How do you achieve this? You construct them. After all what is a loudspeaker? At present it’s a reproducing instrument, but my feeling all along has been that you should regard it as a generating instrument. All musical instruments work by generating sound waves, and so does a loudspeaker, so if you regard it from that point of view your whole notion of how to construct one would change. Why shouldn’t there be a thousand or more ways of building loudspeakers? Instead of what we consider to be electronic music at present, you would then make your music geared to what the particular loudspeaker can produce, and the whole input becomes simple instead of complex.
> > > [!PDF|yellow] [[Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor.pdf#page=46&selection=106,2,106,55&color=yellow|Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor, p.46]]
> > Tudor and Schonfeld, “From Piano to Electronics,” 26.
> 
> 
> 
> Una de las ideas de mi serie Rainforest es que los altavoces deben ser individuos, deben ser instrumentos. Entonces, si necesitas cien de ellos para llenar una sala, cada uno debe tener su propia voz individual. ¿Cómo logras esto? Los construyes. Después de todo, ¿qué es un altavoz? En la actualidad, es un instrumento reproductor, pero mi sensación siempre ha sido que se lo debe considerar como un instrumento generador. Todos los instrumentos musicales funcionan generando ondas sonoras, y lo mismo ocurre con los altavoces, así que si lo consideras desde ese punto de vista, toda tu noción de cómo construir uno cambiaría. ¿Por qué no debería haber mil o más formas de construir altavoces? En lugar de lo que consideramos música electrónica en la actualidad, harías tu música adaptada a lo que el altavoz en particular puede producir, y toda la entrada se vuelve simple en lugar de compleja. 

> [!PDF|yellow] [[Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor.pdf#page=46&color=yellow|Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor, p.46]]
> >-David Tudor In 1968, two years after the premiere of Bandoneon!, Tudor expanded upon one of the smaller features of the 9 Evenings composition and cultivated it into his most well-known work— Rainforest (1968). It was an experimental work that further investigated the usage of transducers and resonant objects, similar to the sculptures used by Tudor in the performance of Bandoneon!. The piece itself was an exploration of the way in which different materials sounded when 73. Tudor and Schonfeld, “From Piano to Electronics,” 26. 41 transducers were attached and audio signals vibrated through them. To paraphrase Tudor: why couldn’t loudspeakers be approached as musical instruments themselves? That was the grain of thought that prompted Tudor’s Rainforest. Knowing the physical design of a loudspeaker is fundamental for understanding the concept and construction behind Rainforest. According to John David Weinland in his 1969 article:74 "a loudspeaker is an electro-mechanical transducer consisting of a thin membrane (usually paper) set in motion by a coil of wire which is attached to the membrane and placed in a magnetic field. The amplitude of the sound depends on the distance travelled by the membrane (or its excursion), which in turn depends on the amount of current flowing in the coil of wire.”75 Another explanation, published more recently: “A speaker is a type of transducer that converts electrical energy (the audio signal) into mechanical energy (vibration of the speaker cone/diaphragm). This vibration transfers kinetic energy to the surrounding air, which results in creating sound waves that can be heard. The speed of vibration determines the frequency.”76 The basic idea behind a loudspeaker, and its relation to Rainforest, is that a transducer functions by converting electrical signals—audio signals in this case—into “mechanical energy,” or more specifically, the vibrations of the loudspeaker’s paper cone. Rainforest was a rethinking of the traditional loudspeaker and how materials different from the typical paper cones reacted and resonated when transducers were connected directly to them.
> 
> En 1968, dos años después del estreno de Bandoneon!, Tudor amplió una de las características más pequeñas de la composición 9 Evenings y la cultivó en su obra más conocida: Rainforest (1968). Fue una obra experimental que investigó más a fondo el uso de transductores y objetos resonantes, similares a las esculturas utilizadas por Tudor en la interpretación de Bandoneon!. La pieza en sí era una exploración de la forma en que sonaban los distintos materiales cuando se les colocaban transductores y las señales de audio vibraban a través de ellos. Parafraseando a Tudor: ¿por qué no se podía abordar a los altavoces como instrumentos musicales en sí mismos? Esa fue la idea que motivó a Tudor a crear Rainforest.

> [!PDF|yellow] [[Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor.pdf#page=48&selection=2,0,101,44&color=yellow|Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor, p.48]]
> > The first performance of Rainforest took place on March 9, 1968, and was commissioned by Merce Cunningham for his dance RainForest.77 After receiving Cunningham’s request a year earlier, in 1967, Tudor wanted to build upon his earlier work with transducers seen in Bandoneon!, which formed loudspeaker type objects from transducers and resonant materials. In the first performances of Rainforest, Mumma and Tudor sent audio signal via signal generators to transducers hooked up to various resonant objects—at least eight. Contact microphones attached to the objects were used to amplify the resulting sound. The focus of the “loudspeaker objects” were the resonant materials and how their materials accentuated or dampened particular frequency ranges—essentially forming a new “loudspeaker-instrument.” The instrument was unique in regard to the way in which the acoustic material was being used, as Gordon Mumma described, in regards to the innovation within Rainforest: Rainforest is an example of acoustic modification of electronically generated sound. In its earliest form, the sounds of Rainforest were electronically generated and applied by special transducers to various resonant objects of wood, metal, and plastic. Each of the combinations of transducer and resonant object was an ‘instrumental loudspeaker’ that added and subtracted harmonics and occasionally created complex inter-modulations with the electronic sound sources. Further, attached to each ‘instrumental loudspeaker’ was a small microphone that allowed the acoustically modified sound to be further amplified and resonantly distributed by conventional loudspeakers throughout the performance space. He recycled his acoustical sounds through the mixer as if within an ecological system, returning them to the resonating objects and adding more sounds to the widening cycles.78 The “acoustic modification of electronically generated sound” formed from “combinations of transducer and resonant object” was an inherently experimental rethinking of a traditional loudspeaker executed by Tudor in Rainforest—and the whole driving force behind the work.
> 
> Conocer el diseño físico de un altavoz es fundamental para comprender el concepto y la construcción detrás de Rainforest. Según John David Weinland en su artículo de 1969:74 "un altavoz es un transductor electromecánico que consiste en una membrana delgada (generalmente de papel) puesta en movimiento por una bobina de alambre que está unida a la membrana y colocada en un campo magnético. La amplitud del sonido depende de la distancia recorrida por la membrana (o su excursión), que a su vez depende de la cantidad de corriente que fluye en la bobina de alambre". 75 Otra explicación, publicada más recientemente: "Un altavoz es un tipo de transductor que convierte la energía eléctrica (la señal de audio) en energía mecánica (vibración del cono/diafragma del altavoz). Esta vibración transfiere energía cinética al aire circundante, lo que da como resultado la creación de ondas de sonido que se pueden escuchar. La velocidad de vibración determina la frecuencia". 76
La idea básica detrás de un altavoz, y su relación con Rainforest, es que un transductor funciona convirtiendo señales eléctricas (señales de audio en este caso) en "energía mecánica", o más específicamente, las vibraciones del cono de papel del altavoz. Rainforest fue una nueva concepción del altavoz tradicional y de cómo reaccionaban y resonaban materiales diferentes a los típicos conos de papel cuando se conectaban transductores directamente a ellos. La primera representación de Rainforest tuvo lugar el 9 de marzo de 1968 y fue encargada por Merce Cunningham para su danza RainForest.77 Después de recibir la petición de Cunningham un año antes, en 1967, Tudor quiso continuar con su trabajo anterior con transductores vistos en Bandoneon!, que formaba objetos tipo altavoz a partir de transductores y materiales resonantes. En las primeras representaciones de Rainforest, Mumma y Tudor enviaron señales de audio a través de generadores de señales a transductores conectados a varios objetos resonantes, al menos ocho. Se utilizaron micrófonos de contacto unidos a los objetos para amplificar el sonido resultante. El foco de los “objetos altavoz” eran los materiales resonantes y cómo sus materiales acentuaban o amortiguaban rangos de frecuencia particulares, formando esencialmente un nuevo “instrumento altavoz”. El instrumento era único en cuanto a la forma en que se utilizaba el material acústico, como describió Gordon Mumma, en relación con la innovación dentro de Rainforest:
Rainforest es un ejemplo de modificación acústica del sonido generado electrónicamente. En su forma más temprana, los sonidos de Rainforest se generaban electrónicamente y se aplicaban mediante transductores especiales a varios objetos resonantes de madera, metal y plástico. **Cada una de las combinaciones de transductor y objeto resonante era un "altavoz instrumental" que sumaba y restaba armónicos y ocasionó complejas intermodulaciones con las fuentes de sonido electrónico.** 

> [!PDF|yellow] [[Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor.pdf#page=48&selection=120,0,129,4&color=yellow|Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor, p.48]]
> > Gordon Mumma, “David Tudor the Composer along the Path to Rainforest (2006/2013),” in Cybersonic Arts, 154.
> 
> 

**La “modificación acústica del sonido generado electrónicamente” formada a partir de “combinaciones de transductor y objeto resonante” fue una reconsideración inherentemente experimental de un altavoz tradicional ejecutado por Tudor en Rainforest, y toda la fuerza impulsora detrás de la obra.**

> [!important] La escena "Silver Clouds" la hizo Andy Warhol con globos de helio (pop art) como reemplazando los árboles y los animales.

> [!important] Tudor usaba osciladores y ruidos imitando a los pájaros (rugidos) + objetos con asociaciones corporales
> CUERPO TUDOR ---> AUSENCIA ---> MENTE (mente en circuitos, exteriorización de lo corporal)

> [!PDF|red] [[Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor.pdf#page=46&selection=35,1,66,8&color=red|Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor, p.46]]
> > One of the ideas in my Rainforest series is that loudspeakers should be individuals, they should be instruments. So if you need a hundred of them to fill a hall, each one should have its own individual voice. How do you achieve this? You construct them. After all what is a loudspeaker? At present it’s a reproducing instrument, but my feeling all along has been that you should regard it as a generating instrument. All musical instruments work by generating sound waves, and so does a loudspeaker, so if you regard it from that point of view your whole notion of how to construct one would change. Why shouldn’t there be a thousand or more ways of building loudspeakers? Instead of what we consider to be electronic music at present, you would then make your music geared to what the particular loudspeaker can produce, and the whole input becomes simple instead of complex.
> 
> [!PDF|yellow] [[Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor.pdf#page=47&selection=3,61,10,1&color=yellow|Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor, p.47]]
> >  To paraphrase Tudor: why couldn’t loudspeakers be approached as musical instruments themselves? That was the grain of thought that prompted Tudor’s Rainforest.

> [!important] Cada altavoz debía tener 'su propia voz', según Tudor **no** pensarlo como un instrumento reproductor sino como un instrumento generador.

> [!important] Rainforest IV usa flotadores de inodoros - es más participativa (**VER**) pero pareciera que los espectadores podían caminar y tocar los altavoces

> [!PDF|yellow] [[Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor.pdf#page=47&selection=18,2,49,2&color=yellow|Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor, p.47]]
> > According to John David Weinland in his 1969 article:74 "a loudspeaker is an electro-mechanical transducer consisting of a thin membrane (usually paper) set in motion by a coil of wire which is attached to the membrane and placed in a magnetic field. The amplitude of the sound depends on the distance travelled by the membrane (or its excursion), which in turn depends on the amount of current flowing in the coil of wire.”75 Another explanation, published more recently: “A speaker is a type of transducer that converts electrical energy (the audio signal) into mechanical energy (vibration of the speaker cone/diaphragm). This vibration transfers kinetic energy to the surrounding air, which results in creating sound waves that can be heard. The speed of vibration determines the frequency.”76
> 

> [!important] considerando un altavoz como un transductor (**Dispositivo que transforma el efecto de una causa física, como la presión, la temperatura, la dilatación, la humedad, etc., en otro tipo de señal, normalmente eléctrica**) electromecánico que consiste en una membrana delgada puesta en movimiento por una bobina de alambre que está unido a la membrana y colocada en un campo electromagnético. La amplitud del sonido depende de la distancia recorrida por la membrana, que a su vez, depende de la cantidad de corriente que fluye en la bobina de alambre.

> [!important] energía eléctrica (señal de audio) -----> en -----> energía mecánica (vibración dl cono o diafragma) **transfiere energía cinética al aire**
## Idea 1
> [!important] Entonces, transductor x ----> + objeto resonante = nuevo altavoz (altavoz instrumental), que además, amplificaba con un micrófono por sala (**brindaban un único timbre**)
**==QUE ONDA ESTO, ESTADO TIMBRICO????==**

> [!PDF|yellow] [[Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor.pdf#page=51&selection=2,0,52,11&color=yellow|Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor, p.51]]
> > A more simplified way of defining the versions Rainforest II and Rainforest III lies within the audio source materials.86 Rainforest II called for voice input—specifically John Cage’s voice— as source material performed through the transducers. The version known as Rainforest III, is known for the addition of tape materials as sound sources. Rainforest IV, was a collective performed work that first occurred in the summer of 1973 in Chocorua, New Hampshire. It was performed during a New Music in New Hampshire workshop by Tudor. It is important to note, however, that similar to other versions of Rainforest, the version title—Rainforest IV—did not appear until later.

> [!PDF|red] [[Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor.pdf#page=48&selection=56,1,87,20&color=red|Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor, p.48]]
> > Rainforest is an example of acoustic modification of electronically generated sound. In its earliest form, the sounds of Rainforest were electronically generated and applied by special transducers to various resonant objects of wood, metal, and plastic. Each of the combinations of transducer and resonant object was an ‘instrumental loudspeaker’ that added and subtracted harmonics and occasionally created complex inter-modulations with the electronic sound sources. Further, attached to each ‘instrumental loudspeaker’ was a small microphone that allowed the acoustically modified sound to be further amplified and resonantly distributed by conventional loudspeakers throughout the performance space. He recycled his acoustical sounds through the mixer as if within an ecological system, returning them to the resonating objects and adding more sounds to the widening cycles.
> > > [!PDF|red] [[Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor.pdf#page=48&selection=119,0,129,4&color=red|Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor, p.48]]
> >  Gordon Mumma, “David Tudor the Composer along the Path to Rainforest (2006/2013),” in Cybersonic Arts, 154.

> [!important] Rainforest tiene una nueva concepción del altavoz probando diferentes resonadores. Mumma: *"Rainforest es un ejemplo de modificación acústica del sonido generado electrónicamente"*

> [!PDF|yellow] [[Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor.pdf#page=50&selection=0,2,35,60&color=yellow|Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor, p.50]]
> > 44 In a child’s record player, cement the disc to one side of the case. This makes the entire case a sound-producing element. You’ll be surprised at the improvement in the sound. If you cement one of these units to a wood door or the rear of a large plywood panel, the entire door or panel becomes a sound-producing source. You can do the same thing with most hard materials—such as doors, mirrors, windows. If you connect the speaker to the bottom of a coffee table, the tabletop will become a speaker. Among early proposals for potential coneless loudspeaker applications was one from a discotheque operator who said he could use it to turn his dance floor into one giant speaker so that dancers would then feel, as well as hear, the music. Obviously, this will take a much larger unit, but he might just be able to do it.
> 
## Idea 2
> [!important] Tal vez pensar como ==las diferentes versiones de Rainforest generan distintos ESTADOS TÍMBRICOS==

> [!PDF|yellow] [[Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor.pdf#page=52&selection=94,16,118,38&color=yellow|Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor, p.52]]
> > Tudor took a single concept: re-thinking the loudspeaker, and applied it towards the exploration of resonant qualities of different materials. Essentially, Rainforest was a DIY study in building acoustic filters using the same transducers as did Bandoneon!, and the nature of the music was determined by the performers’ selection of found objects.

> [!PDF|important] [[Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor.pdf#page=57&selection=70,2,82,17&color=important|Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor, p.57]]
> > Another version, Rainforest V, was premiered in 2009, thirteen years after the passing of David Tudor. It was the first installed version, described as “a self-running sound environment conceived by the late David Tudor and realized by the group Composers Inside Electronics. Each composer designs and
> 
> > [!PDF|important] [[Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor.pdf#page=58&selection=0,2,29,6&color=important|Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor, p.58]]
> > 52 constructs a set of sculptures which functions as instrumental loudspeakers, and each independently produces sound material to display their sculpture’s resonant characteristics.”103 With the creation of Rainforest V, Composers Inside Electronics remained true to the tradition of Tudor’s Rainforest series as an experimental investigation into the resonances of acoustic materials (found objects) when audio signals are applied via electronics (transducers)—which Gordon Mumma succinctly defined as “acoustic modification of electronically generated sound.
> > > [!PDF|important] [[Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor.pdf#page=58&selection=88,0,93,3&color=important|Hartman_DIY_JohnCage_GordonMumma_DavidTudor, p.58]]
> > Mumma, “David Tudor the Composer,” in Cybersonic Arts, 154
> 
> 
> 

(...) Esta unidad, en resumen, era tecnológicamente similar a las entrañas (controlador) de un altavoz normal, pero fue diseñada para que la Marina la atornillara a un objeto submarino para que funcionara como un altavoz. Este tipo de transductor tiene la potencia suficiente para proyectar el sonido a los oyentes por encima del agua. Tudor comenzó a atornillar transductores a diversos objetos. 
El resultado final del uso del transductor por parte de Tudor fue Rainforest, originalmente una pieza para objetos bastante portátiles y solo de dos a cuatro intérpretes, compuesta para la danza de Cunningham que le dio nombre. Al asistir a una representación de la obra, uno puede caminar hasta algunos de los objetos de los altavoces e incluso dentro de ellos. El resultado es una especie de concierto en el que, a medida que el oyente/observador se mueve por la sala... los intérpretes seleccionan material de origen que realza la respuesta de frecuencia de sus objetos. El propio Tudor siempre tenía cerca un micrófono altamente direccional conectado a unos auriculares. Se lo entregaba a miembros selectos de la audiencia, ofreciéndoles una actuación secreta, en la que los detalles más minuciosos de la respuesta de un objeto podían magnificarse y disfrutarse en un entorno privado con auriculares.

