---
type: obra
author: John Cage
publish: 1966
place: Pan American Union Auditorium
tags:
  - cage
  - tudor
  - obra
  - timeline
  - test
listen:
---
> [!PDF|important] [[YouNakai_RemindedbytheInstruments_David Tudor'sMusic.pdf#page=178&selection=12,0,107,3&color=important|YouNakai_RemindedbytheInstruments_David Tudor'sMusic, p.178]]
> > A more peculiar situation arose with the next entry in the Variations series. Composed in March 1966, Variations VI was a piece conceived specifically “for plurality of sound-systems (any sources, components and loud-speakers)”—now that what Tudor was doing had been given a name. The materials consisted of a huge number of transparencies: 12 with short straight lines, 38 with triangles, 57 with short bisected lines, and 114 with half-circles.104 Triangles represented loudspeakers, bisected lines represented available components (amplifiers, preamplifiers, modulators, filters, and so on), and half-circles represented sound sources. As many of these as necessary could be used to compose a sound system whose spatial placement was determined by dropping the transparencies onto a sheet with a long straight line. The short straight lines would tell where one sound system ended and another began. Cage’s materials thus constrained the number of components along with their position in space, without determining what they actually were. When the piece was premiered on March 26, 1966, at the Fine Arts Foundation in Hartford, Connecticut, the duality of composition was expressed in the program note as a double feature of sorts: John Cage: Composition (indeterminate) / David Tudor: Sound System105 Cage and Tudor performed Variations VI together at least two more times that year.106 As William Fetterman noted in his 1996 study of Cagean theater pieces, the two collaborators held contrary opinions about the sixth piece in the Variations series. The composer of indeterminate scores was not impressed: “I was not very happy with our performances, but he [Tudor] was pleased. They didn’t seem to me to be any more complicated than with one sound system.”107 The composer of sound systems was indeed very pleased: “Variations VI was one of the most enjoyable pieces to perform. It’s interesting because if you’re in a controlled situation it’s very, very beautiful, it turned out to be very theatrical.”108

> [!PDF|important] [[YouNakai_RemindedbytheInstruments_David Tudor'sMusic.pdf#page=179&selection=4,0,94,3&color=important|YouNakai_RemindedbytheInstruments_David Tudor'sMusic, p.179]]
> > When the piece was performed for the second time on April 27, at the Pan American Union Auditorium in Washington, DC, the program misspelled Cage’s role— by sheer chance, yet quite appropriately (Figure 3.): John Cage: Composition (intermediate) / David Tudor: Sound System109 4 This duality of composition influenced how Cage talked about sound systems: with an utter lack of specificity. As he wrote in December 1964, what electronics brought about was a general situation, where anything could be transformed into music: One of the things we nowadays know is that something that happens (anything) can be experienced by means of technique (electronic) as some other (any other) thing (happening). For instance, people getting in and out of elevators and the elevators moving from one floor to another: this “information” can activate circuits that bring to our ears a concatenation of sounds (music).110 Sound systems not only made measurements and parameters useless; they also neutralized the physical difference between materials. Everything was brought together under the singular rubric of “electronics,” which named a general universe of possibilities for turning one thing into another. In another text printed on the concert program at the premiere of Variations VI in March 1966, Cage went even further, claiming that sound systems also did away with objects: (Composition) is involved with process and not with object .. . the difference, say, between an ash tray and the whole room. An ash tray can be seen as having beginning and end, and you can concentrate on it. But when you begin to experience the whole room, then where is the beginning? Where is the middle? Where is the end?111 Composition might be an activity of a sound system, but the sound system itself, as a complex of parametric objects localized in time and space, biased the universal nature of electronics. So it was not enough that instruments became neutral by becoming tools; they ultimately needed to become wireless and invisible. “At present,” Cage wrote in a different text in the same month of March 1966, “it appears to be a series of components—a sound system—but it is a series of components, not a series of components. Soon ’twill be done wirelessly; then it won’t appear to be different than what it already essentially is: not a series of components.”112


https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zEZWQcyC54Q
